---
layout: post
title: Moving-in Party
imported: 31/01/2013
featured: false
---

[Stein](http://www.sem-jacobsen.no/) came over from Norway Sunday morning. We spent a few
hours catching up and reminiscing about the past before going to [Yo!
Sushi](http://www.yosushi.com/) at the [N1 centre](http://www.n1islington.co.uk/) (beware,
eeevil site with music) for dinner with Nadia. Nadia went home afterwards while we went to
the pub. The rest of the evening is a bit blurry, but I woke up the next day partly
dressed and with a severe hangover. A plastic fork in my pocket revealed that I'd had
kebab the previous night.

After drinking lots of water and eating dry bread we decided that we needed some fresh
air, so Stein and I walked to the office and picked up Nadia's iBook (she had it delivered
there since we were in the middle of a move). Nadia stayed home looking after the washing
machine; I had put new washers in and we were running it for the first time in almost
three years.

On the way back we got a bit lost trying to take the bus and save ourselves some walking.
Not knowing quite where we were we had English breakfast for lunch, served by a very
*enthusiastic* young man. We were then pointed in the direction of Essex Road and started
making our way back home. On the way there we accidentally found the pub I'd invited
people to that evening. This was rather lucky, since I still have no internet connection
at home and I'd forgotten to print out directions there from my flat.

Monday evening Stein, Nadia and I went to the [Canonbury
Tavern](http://www.beerintheevening.com/pubs/s/31/3133/Canonbury/Canonbury_Place). Not
long after more friends than I thought I had started turning up--more than 20 people in
the end. Dean said I owed him a alot of money as he had paid many of them to turn up (at
least I *hope* he was joking). Thanks to all who came; you made it as soon to "my perfect
night out" as you can reasonably assume ever experiencing.
