---
title: Toddlercalm
layout: post
---

"ToddlerCalm" is the founding principles we use to raise our son. They
are from a book called "ToddlerCalm: A guide for calmer toddlers and
happier parents" by Sarah Ockwell-Smith. It is available for
[Kindle][] and [paperback][].  In the UK there's also a
[ToddlerCalm 3-hour workshop][workshop]. We have found what we learnt
invaluable in helping us understand what our son is going through
growing up. (And thus how to deal with him.)  This post is about what
we learnt from reading the book and attending the workshop.

[Kindle]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/ToddlerCalm-calmer-toddlers-happier-parents-ebook/dp/B00CQ5R186/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1394282509&sr=1-1&keywords=toddlercalm
[paperback]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/ToddlerCalm-calmer-toddlers-happier-parents/dp/0349401055/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1394282509&sr=1-1
[workshop]: http://toddlercalm.co.uk/pages/parent_classes.html

My wife and I both read the book before we attended the workshop,
which was led by clinical child psychologist Victoria Montgomery.  For
me the workshop was the more powerful of the two; however, I think it
was useful to have read the book as it meant I had some questions
prepared. The book (& course) does teach some tricks for "how to deal
with tantrums" but more than anything it helped us understand what we
can expect from him at his age, and thus we know not to expect too
much. You'd be surprised how much more you can handle of particular
behaviours if you know that it is perfectly normal (despite what
others say!) :-)

My biggest issue was his night-time sleep---or rather lack of it. I
had this expectation that our son should fall asleep at about 8pm, and
I was getting stressed out by him failing to do so. We tried
everything: carrying him around for hours in a dark room, singing to
him or playing calming music. It didn't help much, and we were getting
exhausted. The course taught us that it is entirely normal for
toddlers to sleep irregularly until about 4, and as soon as we learnt
that this was normal it became a lot easier to cope with. He's not
abnormal: he just doesn't sleep as much *as we would like*. He doesn't
go to sleep much earlier now, but it doesn't bother us so much now.

One of the most important thing I learnt was about the
[Theory of Mind](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_mind) and its
importance on social interaction. This is what allows us to see things
from another person's perspective. Until toddlers develop this they
simply won't understand the importance of sharing, for example, or why
it's bad to hit other kids---they don't have the mental development to
support it. And the real kincher is how late this Theory of Mind
develops---much later than I would have thought. According to Victoria
only 10% of kids develop it as early as 4 years, and *10% still haven't
developed it at age 6*.

Another point Victoria was keen to stress was how kids' limited brain
development makes them prone to be overcome by emotion. Their animal
brains take over and they are no longer able to think rationally, or
producing or understanding speech. This is when they need your
compassion and understanding the most. Just about the *worst* you can
do in this situation is punishing your child, for example by calling a
time-out and sending the kid to the naughty step. They simply won't
understand why you're being so mean to them. Victoria underlined this
with a thought experiment: try to imagine you've had a bad day and
you're crying & hugging your parter when she or he comes home. But
instead of asking you what's up and giving you their full attention,
your partner drag you off to a corner and insists you sit there until
you "have calmed down and stopped crying". *How would it make you
feel?  What do you think you would learn from the experience?* If you
don't think you would learn anything positive from it, do you think a
child, with their much more immature brain development, would?

Meal times also used to be stressful for us. Again, a lot of that
stresss came from wrong expectations: that he would eat a balanced
meal every mealtime, and that he would eat at a time of our chosing.
We knew that we didn't want to force him to eat. Over time we learnt
to just let him eat what he wants at meal times. Within limits, of
course, as he choses his food from a selection of foods we
provide. One interesting thing we've found is that our son goes
through phases exploring certain types of food. For example he refused
anything green for a while, but at the moment broccoli is one of his
favourites. He also will sometimes not eat things if they are mixed
together, but will wolf them down separately. We also reasoned that we
have evolved to graze---we doubt stone-age man had three square meals
a day, with no snack in between---so we offer fruits and berries
liberally. As long as he's healthy & developing well we're happy to
let him have a bit of control over his food.  In hindsight his diet is
actually fairly varied; even if every *meal* is not.

As an aside, it could be that the whole concept of a "balanced diet"
is flawed. If you look around a bit it turns out lots of tribal
societies eat incredibly unvaried diets. Eskimos, for example, eat
fish and sealfat almost exclusively: no vegetables at all. (Iceberg
lettuce doesn't take its name from its growing conditions, after all.)
The [Maasai diet](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maasai_people#Diet) is
also predominantly meat.

*Note: There is also a book
[BabyCalm: A Guide for Calmer Babies and Happier Parents][babybook]
and accompanying [BabyCalm website](http://babycalm.co.uk) for parents
of children that haven't reached toddlerhood yet. I haven't read that,
but based on my experience with ToddlerCalm I will definitively snap
it up once we have a baby in the house again.*

[babybook]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/BabyCalm-Calmer-Babies-Happier-Parents-ebook/dp/B008IQY7PW/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1403733078&sr=8-1&keywords=babycalm

